FUll version: 

Visualisation n*1 -  density of Black population by states 

This map shows the various densities of the African American/Black population on US territory. The map shows that the number of African American/Black residents as a proportion of the rest of the population varies significantly across different parts of the US. Indeed, it ranges from around 1% in some states such as Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming to around 30-40% of the population in states like Louisiana, Mississippi, and Georgia. 

Overall, there is a higher density of African American/Black residents on the East side of the US, with the highest density of Black residents being in the South East, where states such as Mississippi have around 38% of their population composed of Black residents. In the South East, states have between 15-40% of their population being Black residents, compared to states in the SouthWest, Western, and MidWest regions which all have less than a 20% density. Overall, the West is significantly less populated with African American/Black residents than the East, with lower levels of African American/Black residents relative to the east being seen in the north eastern states away from the coast. This map shows that there are huge variations in the relative number of Black people compared to other ethnicities across the US. Census data gives us a primary overview of the demographics of African American/Black residents in the US. 

The map shows that the number of African American/Black residents as a proportion of the rest of the population varies significantly across different parts of the US, ranging from around 1% in some states such as Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming to around 30-40% of the population in states like Louisiana, Mississippi, and Georgia. Overall, the West is significantly less populated with African American/Black residents than the East, with lower levels of African American/Black residents relative to the East. This map shows that there are huge variations in the relative number of Black people compared to other ethnicities across the US.


Visualisation n*2 - number of fatal encounters per 10,000 African American/black people in 2017

The second visualisation shows the number of fatal encounters concerning Black people per 10,000 black people in 2017. We chose to compare the number of Black fatal encounters relative to the Black population rather than the total population to account for the varied levels of black residents in different states.  

The map shows the levels of fatal encounters with the police per 10,000 Black residents are more evenly distributed across the US than the density of the Black population. The range of the number of fatal encounters with the police per 10,000 residents ranges from 0-3.57. 

The states in the North West and central regions of West and MidWest states seem to have higher numbers of fatal encounters with the police per 10,000 black residents, with higher concentrations in the Western states, especially near the coast, and in the central regions, moving North East up such as in Indiana, Illinois, and Wisconsin. The states with some of the lowest densities of Black residents (from the previous map) appear to have some of the higher levels of fatal encounters in the Western and South Western states on the border of the US in 2017. Examples of this are Washington, Utah, and New Mexico where the percentage of the state that is Black is 5.1%, 1.72%, and 3.37% respectfully, but the number of fatal encounters with the police per 10,000 Black residents in the same year were 2.42, 1.89, and 2.46. Comparatively, the highest number of fatal encounters in a state in 2017 was 3.57 per 10,000 black residents (Maine - which also had a low density of a Black population at 2.12%) and the highest density of Black residents in a state was 37.99% (Mississippi - which had 0.98 fatal encounters per 10,000 black residents - a low figure compared to the density of black residents there). This evidence shows that in the previously discussed states, lower levels of Black residents correlates with higher numbers of fatal encounters, with a counterexample of Mississippi that had higher levels of Black residents with lower levels of fatal encounters.

 In the south eastern states, however, where states had some of the higher density of Black residents as seen in our previous map, there are mid to low levels of fatal encounters compared to the rest of the US, with most states having between 0-2 fatal encounters. Some exceptions include Arkansas who has higher levels of fatal encounters (2.11 fatal encounters per 10,000 black residents), but Arkansas also had lower levels of black residents compared to its neighbouring states in the south west (16.13% vs levels of around 30%). Some other nearby states with similar trends include Missouri (2.46 fatal encounters vs 12.43% of black residents) and Indiana (2.4 vs 10.24%). There are also some states, such as Texas, that fall in the more positive correlation area, with both having mid to low levels of fatal encounters and density of black residents. A small number of states such as Oklahoma and Colorado also follow this trend. When looking at outliers states, where the number of fatal encounters is null, we may explain these results by a lack of data collection and of police control and reports.  These maps do not show consistent trends between states in the density of black residents per state and the number of fatal encounters with police per 10,000 black residents. In a number of states, there appears to be a negative correlation between the density of black residents per state and the number of fatal encounters with police per 10,000 black residents. Our data, however, needs further investigation and analysis to be able to draw any conclusions and identify trends. 

---------------------------------------

The second map visualization shows the number of fatal encounters by 10,000 black residents. When compared to the first map, we can observe that in states where there is a high density of African American/black population, there are low rates of fatal encounters per 10,000 black residents. This statement is true in states such as but not limited to Nevada, Arizona or Maine. The opposite is also true, where there is a low density of African American/black population, there are high rates of fatal encounters per 10,000 black residents in states such as Maryland, Mississippi or Georgia. When looking at outliers states, where the number of fatal encounters is null, we may explain these results by a lack of data collection and of police control and reports. 

What about the states of New Mexico ? 

Overall, comparing both maps it seems that where African American/black residents are less present, fatal encounters are more frequent. Link to our project ?


Phase 2: Understanding funding in the US

Visualisation n*3 - police funding relative to social funding 
The third map shows the proportion of police funding to social funding.

We chose to investigate levels of police funding throughout the US by using the US Tax Policy Center’s data. We used the data to find the level of police funding per capita as a percentage of the total education (pre-university) and welfare spending per capita in 2017. We chose to use this comparison to show the The results a showed relative rates in the range of 4-16%. 

Some of the lowest levels of police funding as a percentage of education and welfare funding in 2017 are in the North Eastern states where levels range from 4% to 10%. This indicates that police funding is a smaller amount relative to education and welfare funding in these states compared to the rest of the US. It is also interesting that the higher levels of spending on education and welfare compared to police funding occur in the North East. The North Eastern states are home to the Ivy League universities, some of the oldest and most prestigious institutions in the US and entire world. Man The midwest and south western states have similarly low levels with rates between 5-11%. The south eastern and western states have higher levels of police funding relative to education and welfare, with the level of police funding being up to 16% in some states in these regions. 

States such as Nevada (14.85%), Arizona (11%), and Colorado (10.13%) show some of the higher levels of police funding as a percentage of education and welfare funding, whilst surrounding states in the West and SouthWest show mid levels of police funding as a percentage of education and welfare funding (under 10%). Most of these states, for which there is data, show mid to high levels of police brutality, with the number of fatal encounters being around 0.5-3, and lower levels of black residents compared to other ethnicities in each state. Previous analysis showed all such states had levels of black residents under 20%.

South Eastern states show a range of levels of police funding as a percentage of education and welfare compared to other states. Most states have police funding at around 5-10% of education and welfare funding with the exception of Florida which puts levels at the mid to low range compared to the rest of the US. As previously discussed, the SouthEastern states had higher densities of black residents and lower levels of black fatal encounters with the police. The highest ratio of police funding relative to education and welfare funding in the US in 2017 was in Florida at 15.09%. Comparatively, Florida has low levels of black fatal encounters (0.88 per 10,000 black residents) and a low density of a black population (17.6%). It is worth noting that Florida’s population is home to a large hispanic community which is marginalised similarly to black communities in some states. The lack of consistencies with other trends found in the data could be due to a different ethnic group being marginalised and targeted here, but we are unable, in the bounds of our research, to investigate this further. 

